The city of Los Angeles has only ever had one defining dilemma: traffic. This is the consequence of living in a city that becomes more and more populated with each passing year. The grandeur and endless possibilities of the city draws people from all over the globe like moths to a flame. David Leenhardt attempts to address the overwhelming issue of L.A. traffic, but what he seems to miss is the very topic of the city’s overpopulation. In his article, “We Need Tolls to Solve L.A.’s Traffic,” Leenhardt discusses how the city has exhausted every method of decreasing traffic on the roads and freeways. His solution to this issue is a very unpopular one to the public as he calls to put a price on freeways. Not only would this marginalize and penalize low-income families, but it would also feed into a capitalist system that threatens to monetize any infrastructure or service left in the country.
Leenhardt pleads that High-Occupancy/Toll (HOT) lanes on freeways are the only way to go forward and solve our traffic problem. As a driver and native L.A. resident myself, I acknowledge that traffic is an issue on everyone’s mind, but I disagree with the sentiment that traffic occurs at all times and locations, twenty-four hours a day. I commute to my school at least thirty minutes every morning. Yes, there is traffic on the 118 freeway when lanes begin to merge, but in fairness, 90% of the time the congestion is caused by slow drivers. One driver will be going 55 mph in a 65 mph zone and as a result, traffic backs up. Additionally, traffic only ever becomes a cumbersome factor during holidays and evenings when the work day is over. Holidays are mostly affected because of the influx of people swarming into the city. To monetize the freeways wouldn’t stop all of these people from entering the city to spend time with their families.
Leenhardt also targets the main concern of the public when discussing his solution: money. In Leenhardt’s mind, low-income families would benefit from a system where lanes are priced because then the “option to reach their destination quickly could actually save them money.” This is a confusing statement considering this could apply to all incomes and that low-income families would lose money to save money. L.A. is known for its rising housing prices and extreme cost of living. How would those who cannot afford to make ends meet save money by using money they need for food and basic needs to pay to drive? They already pay high prices for gas and car payments, so to add the price of the road to their lives would systematically move these people down the poverty line. It would also marginalize them as now the freeways would become the territory of those would could afford it.
Leenhardt’s off-handed solutions to people who don’t want to pay include using the untolled lanes, going at a different time, carpooling, or taking transit to avoid the cost. These seem wholly ineffective when work, school, and other important obligations are taken into account. It wouldn’t be possible for people to go to their responsibilities “at a different time.” Most people wouldn’t be able to carpool either since everyone has their own obligations and places to go. Furthermore, this would affect the youth of L.A., like myself. On average, college students barely have the means to support themselves financially because of the cost of tuition, student loans, housing and textbooks for classes that usually go for more than a hundred dollars. With all of this emptying their wallets and bank accounts, it seems unreasonable to ask them to donate any more money simply to get to class. They have to pay to park on campus, and now they have to pay to drive as well, possibly as much as $8 per trip?
Leenhardt believes that there is no other way than tolls – that we have “tried them all” – and yet, he never once takes into account the fact that even if freeways are tolled, major side streets such as Fountain, Sunset, Highland, Melrose, and other cross-town traffic will be affected. Then there is the issue of accidents, SIG alerts, and weather that any native driver knows will derail traffic no matter what plan is in place. It seems the only viable option, if Elon Musk wants to invest his billions, is to start by giving us all jet packs. Surely they have technology for that.
With regards to research strategies, tolling the freeways seems like a disastrous and dangerous alternative, and I would begin by searching via Google or our Oviatt Library to find if it has ever been successful in other countries where populations are dense and industries are not quite so unlike Los Angeles as is Minneapolis. Traffic is and will continue to be a problem for the unforeseeable future, but so is class disparity, poverty, homelessness, and over-population. To go forward with Leenhardt’s solution to monetize the freeway lanes would essentially bankrupt and marginalize groups such as poor and low-income families, college students, and those merely trying to get to work. This seems a poor choice for too many L.A. residents.
